Metric naming conventions (#108)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/metrics/0108-naming-conventions.md

# Metric naming conventions

## Purpose

Metric names and labels are the primary read-interface to metric data. The names and taxonomy need to be understandable and discoverable during routine exploration -- and this becomes critical during incidents.

## Guidelines

Namespace similar metrics together. Define top-level namespaces for common metric categories: for OS, like CPU and network; for app runtimes, like the JVM. This aids in discovery and adhoc comparison

Provide consistent names for common label. Provides discoverability and disambiguation similar to metric names.

"As a rule of thumb, [aggregations] over all the dimensions of a given metric should be meaningful," as Prometheus recommends.

> Avoid semantic ambiguity. Use namespaced metric names in cases where similar metrics have significantly different implementations across the holistics of metrics. For example, every garbage collected runtime has a slightly different strategies and measures. Using common metric names for GC, not namespaces by the runtime, could create dissimilar comparisons and confusion for end users. Measures of operating system memory are similar.

Author: Revised, thanks!

## Conventions

All metrics have a limited set of common labels:

> * `system.host`

Reviewer: Unclear why `system.host` is singled out. Is there something special about it or this is just an example?

Author: Resolving now -- this will be covered in a future doc

### Operation System

#### CPU

`system.cpu` is the core metric name.

Standard usage labels include, non-exhaustively,
* `cpu.idle`
* `cpu.user`
* `cpu.sys`
* `cpu.real`
* `cpu.iowait`
* `cpu.nice`
* `cpu.interrupt`
* `cpu.softirq`

> * `cpu.steal`

Reviewer: Aren't labels a key/value pair? Which is the key and which is the value here?

Author: Resolving now -- specifics about metric names and labels will be covered in a future doc. Either `cpu` or `kind` would be the label name. Do you want this doc to cover that, or should we save it for the doc with the list of specific metrics?

Standard labels include, non-exhaustively,
* `memory.free`
* `memory.resident`
* `memory.shared`
* `memory.private`

TODO: how can a user derive total memory? how about memory utilization? memory allocations that are reported in more than one label may make this difficult.

#### More system metrics

Possibilities:
* Disk
* Filesystems
* Load
* Per-process
* Processes and threads?

Note for discussion: see this [excellent reference guide](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11qSmzD9e7PnzaJPYRFdkkKbjTLrAKmvyQpjBjpJsR2s/edit#gid=0)

### Caution

Operating systems will report different labels for common metrics based on their architecture. Queries should be scoped to a host or cluster running the same operating system to avoid aggregating dissimilar measures.

#### TODO lower-level system metrics to consider
* CPU interrupts
* System calls
* Swap and paging

### Application Runtime

All runtime metric names should be reported with a namespace that includes the name of the runtime, eg, `runtime.go.*`.

#### Go

All Go runtime metrics should be within the `runtime.go.*` namespace.

Common metrics include:
* `runtime.go.goroutines`
* `runtime.go.heap_alloc`

> * `runtime.go.gc` with labels `gc.count`

Reviewer: What does `runtime.go.gc` measure? Is it a duration? What does `gc.count` label do?

> # Metric instrument naming conventions

Reviewer 2: this document reads more like naming guidelines, not conventions. Conventions would actually include recommendations for common patterns, like `runtime.***`.

Reviewer 3: #119 is coupled with this document with some conventions. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/657 describes a conventional naming pattern.

Originally this document contained conventions, and we split the work apart. @tedpennings would you substitute "guidelines" in for "conventions"?

Reviewer 4: Changed to guidelines in 8b88b36

To ensure these goals and consistency in future metric naming standards, this outlines a meta-standard for these names.

## Guidelines

Metric names and labels exist within a single universe and a single hierarchy. Metric names and labels MUST be considered within the universe of all existing metric names. When defining new metric names and labels, consider the prior art of existing standard metrics and metrics from frameworks/libraries.

Associated metrics SHOULD be nested together in a hierarchy based on their usage. Define a top-level hierarchy for common metric categories: for OS metrics, like CPU and network; for app runtimes, like GC internals. Libraries and frameworks should nest their metrics into a hierarchy as well. This aids in discovery and adhoc comparison. This allows a user to find similar metrics given a certain metric.

The hierarchical structure of metrics defines the namespacing. Supporting OpenTelemetry artifacts define the metric structures and hierarchies for some categories of metrics, and these can assist decisions when creating future metrics.

> Common labels SHOULD be consistently named. This aids in discoverability and disambiguates similar labels to metric names.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure how to interpret this w.r.t. service name. For example, [Prometheus][] guidelines specifically state

> For metrics specific to an application, the prefix is usually the application name itself.

In contrast, at Uber we structure all metrics to have a set of common infra labels (like zone/datacenter) that includes `service` name. So if have two services A and B and they both emit a metric with name "blah", then because it comes from different services there's no guarantee that the semantics of such metric are identical.

[Prometheus]: https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/

Reviewer 3: (I assume this comment relates to line 15.) 

The Prometheus guidelines, which we are following here, say that same-named metrics should be meaningful to aggregate (maybe not sensible, just meaningful). If you have a metric named "requests", maybe, with a service label, it's meaningful to aggregate those across services. So if "blah" is used across services, the different appearances **ought** to mean the same thing.

You didn't say whether you think the way Uber does this is good or not? At Lightstep we did in fact use the application prefix on our "requests" metric, and most of the time I'm glad I don't have to filter by service to build a service-specific dashboard. But once in a while, I want a generic dashboard and I can't just group by service, so it's not always clear what is best.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if there's something actionable about this line.  
As it is written, it makes sense to me.  We're saying that, across broad categories of metrics, labels that mean the same thing (that is: common labels) should be named the same thing.  

This seems like enough detail for this guideline.  More detail than this belongs in semantic conventions, in my opinion.

> 

Reviewer 2: > Common labels SHOULD be consistently named

What does "common labels" mean? Common in what context/scope? A single service? An organization?

Reviewer 3: I was hoping to avoid a debate over naming label keys. For example, you have a label key named "service" and have used it on some metrics, and I have a label key named "service" and have used it on some different metrics. How are we to know that those labels are not the same? The answer would be to add namespacing of labels. I recall the OpenCensus guidelines were to prefix your label names with a DNS prefix that you own. So I might have a `lightstep.com/service` label and you might have an `uber.com/service` label. For this to create a good user experience, I'd like the DNS prefix to not display by default. What would you like to see, @yurishkuro?

Reviewer 4: The way I read this guidance is: if we have a label that should be added to many different categories of metric instrument, and that label's semantic meaning is the same across all those categories, its name should be consistent.  

The most obvious example I can think of would be _status_, whose value will be a CanonicalSpanStatus.  

As a user, I would find it intuitive when searching my metrics in my UI to always find the success/failure information under the same `status` label.

I'm not sure I understand the example `service` label.  Would it be the name of the service being instrumented?  If so, perhaps we would want some semantic conventions around how to apply Resource attributes as metric labels.

If this is the case, I'm not sure if we need to change this line. Is this guidance not clear enough? What wording would make our meaning more clear?

Reviewer 3: I think it's safe to say we can merge this and debate this topic again as we modify the specification.

["As a rule of thumb, **aggregations** over all the dimensions of a given metric **SHOULD** be meaningful,"](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/#metric-names) as Prometheus recommends.

> Semantic ambiguity SHOULD be avoided. Use prefixed metric names in cases where similar metrics have significantly different implementations across the breadth of all existing metrics. For example, every garbage collected runtime has slightly different strategies and measures. Using a single set of metric names for GC, not divided by the runtime, could create dissimilar comparisons and confusion for end users. (For example, prefer `runtime.java.gc*` over `runtime.gc.*`.) Measures of many operating system metrics are similar.

Reviewer 5: I think this makes sense semantically but creates an issue in discoverability. I could see myself searching for e.g. [load average](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Load_(computing)) and not knowing whether to look at `system.cpu.load_average` or `system.unix.cpu.load_average` or `system.linux.cpu.load_average` for example. The convention of "use prefixed metric names in cases where similar metrics have significantly different implementations across the breadth of all existing metrics" makes a lot of sense when creating metrics. When discovering them though, it requires the user to know the breadth of all existing metrics to determine if what they're looking for is prefixed by the OS/runtime or not 😨. I guess there is a trade-off between discoverability and ambiguity?

Reviewer 3: My hopes are pinned on autocompletion support to help users discover metrics.

Provide consistent names for common labels. This aids in discoverability and disambiguates similar labels to metric names.

"As a rule of thumb, **aggregations** over all the dimensions of a given metric should be meaningful," as Prometheus recommends.

Avoid semantic ambiguity. Use prefixed metric names in cases where similar metrics have significantly different implementations across the breadth of all existing metrics. For example, every garbage collected runtime has a slightly different strategies and measures. Using common metric names for GC, not namespaced by the runtime, could create dissimilar comparisons and confusion for end users. (For example, prefer `runtime.java.gc*` over `runtime.gc*`.) Measures of many operating system metrics are similar.

For conventional metrics or metrics that have their units covered by OpenTelemetry metadata (eg `Metric.WithUnit` in Go), do not include the units in the metric name. Units may be included when it provides additional meaning to the metric name. Metrics must, above all, be understandable and usable.

> ## End of document

Author: The below is for discussion. It's easier to have threaded discussion with placeholder points from the main content.

# Metric instrument naming conventions

## Purpose

> Names and labels for metric instruments are primarily how humans interact with metric data -- users rely on these names to build dashboards and perform analysis. The names and hierarchical structure need to be understandable and discoverable during routine exploration -- and this becomes critical during incidents.

Reviewer 6: I think it would help to clarify also that this doc is intended to act as a framework for subsequent semantic convention PRs.

Maybe something like:

```suggestion
Names and labels for metric instruments are primarily how humans interact with metric data -- users rely on these names to build dashboards and perform analysis. The names and hierarchical structure need to be understandable and discoverable during routine exploration -- and this becomes critical during incidents.

To ensure these goals and consistency in future metric naming standards, this outlines a meta-standard for these names.
```

## Guidelines

> Metric names and labels exist within a single universe and a single hierarchy. Metric names and labels should be considered within the universe of all existing metric names. When defining new metric names and labels, consider the prior art of existing standard metrics and metrics from frameworks/libraries.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Metric names and labels exist within a single universe and a single hierarchy. Metric names and labels MUST be considered within the universe of all existing metric names. When defining new metric names and labels, consider the prior art of existing standard metrics and metrics from frameworks/libraries.
```

> Nest similar metrics together in a hierarchy based on their usage. Define a top-level hierarchy for common metric categories: for OS metrics, like CPU and network; for app runtimes, like GC internals. Libraries and frameworks should nest their metrics into a hierarchy as well. This aids in discovery and adhoc comparison. This allows a user to find similar metrics given a certain metric.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Associated metrics SHOULD be nested together in a hierarchy based on their usage. Define a top-level hierarchy for common metric categories: for OS metrics, like CPU and network; for app runtimes, like GC internals. Libraries and frameworks should nest their metrics into a hierarchy as well. This aids in discovery and adhoc comparison. This allows a user to find similar metrics given a certain metric.
```

The hierarchical structure of metrics defines the namespacing. Supporting OpenTelemetry artifacts define the metric structures and hierarchies for some categories of metrics, and these can assist decisions when creating future metrics.

> Provide consistent names for common labels. This aids in discoverability and disambiguates similar labels to metric names.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Common labels SHOULD be consistently named. This aids in discoverability and disambiguates similar labels to metric names.
```

> "As a rule of thumb, **aggregations** over all the dimensions of a given metric should be meaningful," as Prometheus recommends.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
["As a rule of thumb, **aggregations** over all the dimensions of a given metric **SHOULD** be meaningful,"](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/#metric-names) as Prometheus recommends.
```

> Avoid semantic ambiguity. Use prefixed metric names in cases where similar metrics have significantly different implementations across the breadth of all existing metrics. For example, every garbage collected runtime has a slightly different strategies and measures. Using common metric names for GC, not namespaced by the runtime, could create dissimilar comparisons and confusion for end users. (For example, prefer `runtime.java.gc*` over `runtime.gc*`.) Measures of many operating system metrics are similar.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Semantic ambiguity SHOULD be avoided. Use prefixed metric names in cases where similar metrics have significantly different implementations across the breadth of all existing metrics. For example, every garbage collected runtime has a slightly different strategies and measures. Using common metric names for GC, not namespaced by the runtime, could create dissimilar comparisons and confusion for end users. (For example, prefer `runtime.java.gc*` over `runtime.gc*`.) Measures of many operating system metrics are similar.
```

> Avoid semantic ambiguity. Use prefixed metric names in cases where similar metrics have significantly different implementations across the breadth of all existing metrics. For example, every garbage collected runtime has a slightly different strategies and measures. Using common metric names for GC, not namespaced by the runtime, could create dissimilar comparisons and confusion for end users. (For example, prefer `runtime.java.gc*` over `runtime.gc*`.) Measures of many operating system metrics are similar.

Reviewer 7: Use of the term `namespace` here is confusing for the same reason.

Author: Great point -- fixed in f2c990e ("divided by the runtime")

> For conventional metrics or metrics that have their units covered by OpenTelemetry metadata (eg `Metric.WithUnit` in Go), do not include the units in the metric name. Units may be included when it provides additional meaning to the metric name. Metrics must, above all, be understandable and usable.

Reviewer 6: This should more explicitly state its normative guidance:

```suggestion
For conventional metrics or metrics that have their units included in OpenTelemetry metadata (eg `metric.WithUnit` in Go), SHOULD NOT include the units in the metric name. Units may be included when it provides additional meaning to the metric name. Metrics MUST, above all, be understandable and usable.
```

## End of document

The below text is for threaded discussion and will be deleted when ready to merge.

Goal heading out of this document: when this merges, start writing specific semantic conventions for os, database, etc. Forthcoming docs will address specific metric: Network, OS, OS-agnostic

## TODO TODO Working Area and Outstanding Questions TODO TODO

> ### Fundamental questions - do we need to address this?

Reviewer 6: > do we need to address this?

I don't think these need to be addressed, at least not here.

* What is a metric?
* What separates a metric from a label?

### General questions

> ~Instrumentation library != namespace~ (see note above)

Reviewer 7: It is not clear which node is referred to as `namespace` is rather ambiguous here and nothing else mentions instrumentation libraries.

Author: Revised, thanks for pointing this out!

Author: This was from a discussion section of the doc and isn't part of the final doc. Resolving.

Resource?

Labels, key:value
- one common label name or metric-specific label names, eg, for CPU metric, **kind**:idle or **cpu**:idle

* What about things that overlap with tracing span data like upstream/downstream callers or originating systems?

## Bike shed

* Separators

>   * namespace separators, eg, `runtime.go`

Reviewer 7: We already have a namespace which is the instrumentation library name. Use of namespace here to mean something different is confusing.

Author: This was from a discussion section of the doc and is not part of the final doc. Resolving.

>   * word-token separtors inside a metric name, eg, `heap_alloc`

Reviewer 8: My vote, FWIW, is dot-separate the namespace from the name, and underscore the rest. 

But, I don't feel strongly about this. What I do feel strongly about is that there is an obvious programmatic way to map between what we decide and other schemes that might be needed for various backends.  If we were to decide (for instance) to double-underscore rather than dots for separating the namespace, that would be totally a-ok with me.

Author: I'm with you. `runtime.go.goroutines` and `runtime.go.heap_alloc`. Names are merely examples, but it's the dots and the underscores.

Author: This came up a couple times in the SIG and there was no dissent. Marking as resolved and moving forward.

## End of document

The below text is for threaded discussion and will be deleted when ready to merge.

Goal heading out of this document: when this merges, start writing specific semantic conventions for os, database, etc. Forthcoming docs will address specific metric: Network, OS, OS-agnostic

## TODO TODO Working Area and Outstanding Questions TODO TODO

### Fundamental questions - do we need to address this?
* What is a metric?
* What separates a metric from a label?

### General questions

~Instrumentation library != namespace~ (see note above)

Resource?

Labels, key:value
- one common label name or metric-specific label names, eg, for CPU metric, **kind**:idle or **cpu**:idle

* What about things that overlap with tracing span data like upstream/downstream callers or originating systems?

## Bike shed

* Separators
  * namespace separators, eg, `runtime.go`
  * word-token separtors inside a metric name, eg, `heap_alloc`

> * Fixed gear? 10 speed?

Reviewer 8: Belt drive with an IGH
